---
layout: post
title: "Week 9"
---

Today:

* server updates
* Networking Overview
* software emulation
* Building a baby browser

## Networking 


### IP addresses

> An Internet Protocol address (IP address) is a numerical label such as 192.0.2.1 that is connected to a computer network that uses the Internet Protocol for communication...An IP address serves two principal functions: it identifies the host, or more specifically its network interface, and it provides the location of the host in the network, and thus the capability of establishing a path to that host. Its role has been characterized as follows: "A name indicates what we seek. An address indicates where it is. A route indicates how to get there." The header of each IP packet contains the IP address of the sending host and that of the destination host. --[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_address)

### Emulation

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/m6l3Elk7-Hg?si=KzIHGwH50kK7VF32" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>


# Javascript!

### Introduction to Javascript ES6

ES6 conventions

##### Variables

```
let var;
const a_constant_variable;
```

##### Functions

Named function: 

```
function doSomething( optional_passed_in_vars ){
  //function code
}
```

Anonymous Function:

runs once, usually 'in place'

```
function(){ 
  //do stuff here 
}
```

Fat arrow functions:


```
() => {
  //function code
}


( passed_vars ) => {
  //function code
}
```

Putting it all together:

```
() => {
  const replaceText = (selector, text) => {
    const element = document.getElementById(selector)
    if (element) element.innerText = text
  }

  for (const type of ['chrome', 'node', 'electron']) {
    replaceText(`${type}-version`, process.versions[type])
  }
}
```

### Electron

What is Electron?

> Electron is a free and open-source software framework developed and maintained by GitHub.It allows for the development of desktop GUI applications using web technologies: it combines the Chromium rendering engine and the Node.js runtime. Electron is the main GUI framework behind several open-source projects including Atom, GitHub Desktop, Light Table, Visual Studio Code, Evernote, and WordPress Desktop.

Also: Discord, Slack, Whatsapp, Beaker Browser, Skype, Signal, Visual Studio Code, Etcher, Ramme (instagram on the desktop),  and many others.

How does it work?

In short: it packages a website as an application, a full browser itself along with HTML, CSS, Javascript and Node.js for a specific app. 

Advantages:
- "write once, work everywhere"
- use a language you already know
- lots of learning / building resources and a community of people working with it

Disadvantages:
- Not native-specific design
- "Bloated" (packages an entire Chrome-based web browser, which may be redundant)
- Security



