---
layout: post
title: "Week 15: Wrap it up"
---

Today:  
- Semester Review
- pair check-ins
- studio coding time and meetings

## Semester Review

### Social Software reviewed
- Special.fish
- Bulletin Boards (Community Memory)
- Servers
- Blogs (Zonelets)
- Webrings 
- Shared Servers (Tilde Servers, Anti-Soft server via ssh, Wall, Write)
- Finger
- Version Control Software (Git, GitHub, GitHub Desktop)
- Codes of Conduct
- Software Licenses
- alternative browsers (w3m, lynx, Falkon)
- co-coding (via VS Code live share)
- Gemini protocol (LaGrange) 
- Shared Data in json (Corpora)
- Chirp
- Experimental Social Media (Minus Social, Die With Me, Somebody)

### Learning Goals covered

* You will learn about a history of software for communication and community-building, both early Internet technology and current technology, protocols and software
* You will learn to use key software tools for collaborative software creation and use them to build software on top of network infrastructure
* You will be able to articulate social and political conditions in collaborative and social software and be able to select and use frameworks, licenses and software choices informed by this knowledge

## Final Project Requirements:

For the final project of our class all students join an open source software project and contribute to it. There is no one size fits all requirement as to the type of project and one's contribution. Contributions include fixing bugs, writing documentation, translation, porting, running tests, contributing to core code and other ways.

### Final Report:

Part 1:

Write a 2 page report on your experience in the class this semester working with open source software and social software. In some ways we've gone down a rabbit hole, deep, to discover the process of how software is collaboratively built and maintained.

At minimum, your report should include:

A. Describe the ecosystem of open source software in your own words: how it functions, who contributes to it, and what kinds of issues are present (barriers to entry, rewards to contribute, advantages, disadvantages, etc). You are welcome to include your own thoughts on the community as well as the technical process underlying the ecosystem.

B. Describe and analyze the open source software you've contributed to. Include the project title, link to its repo, link to its website and any other public pages online. Describe the community, its creators, and where discussion or other aspects of this 'community' take place. Describe what drew you to selecting this software, what you discovered, and most importantly, how you participated. Describe what your contribution was, what barriers you may have experienced if any, and how you contributed. What did you learn in this process? 

**Include a step by step writeup of your contribution, going through each of the steps you took.** This can be in narrative or bullet point format.

C. What is left to do, or what steps would you take next?

D. Is contributing to open source software rewarding or are their inherent limitations or other issues? Now that you're a participant in the open source software community, describe ways you could make it more welcoming and friendly for those starting out (people such as yourself :).

**IMPORTANT: Include screenshots, links to your code, pull requests, issues and/or any project pages.**

## Resources

- [Open Source Guide: How to Contribute](https://opensource.guide/how-to-contribute/)
- [Getting started on open source when you don't know where to start](https://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/getting-started-on-open-source-when-you-don-t-know-where-to-start) on Code Newbie podcast
- [How to Contribute to an Open Source Project on GitHub](https://egghead.io/courses/how-to-contribute-to-an-open-source-project-on-github)
- [Open Source Doesn't Mean More Software is Better Software](https://www.wired.com/story/more-software-isnt-better-software/)


